Title: Designing Barrier Functions for Graceful Safety Control

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.03497v1

Published Time: Thu, 05 Mar 2026 01:11:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Designing Barrier Functions for Graceful Safety Control ⋆

# Yejin Moon a, Gábor Orosz b, Hosam K. Fathy c

> a

Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA 

> b

Department of Mechanical Engineering and Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Michigan, MI 48109, USA. 

> c

Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA 

Abstract 

This paper examines the problem of achieving “grace” when controlling dynamical systems for safety, which is defined in terms of providing multi-layered safety assurances. Namely, two safety layers are created: a primary layer that represents a desirable degree of safety, and a secondary failsafe layer. Graceful control then involves ensuring that even if the primary layer is breached, the failsafe layer remains forward invariant. The paper pursues this goal by constructing a safety constraint that combines the concepts of zeroing and reciprocal control barrier functions with regard to the primary and secondary safe sets, respectively. This constraint is analogous to a stiffening spring, making it possible to construct energy-based analytical proofs of the resulting graceful safety guarantees. The proposed approach is developed for systems with a relative degree of either 1 or 2, the latter case being particularly useful for mechanical systems. We demonstrate the applicability of the method using a wall collision avoidance example. This demonstration highlights the benefits of the proposed approach compared to traditional benchmarks from the literature. 

Key words: Control barrier functions, graceful safety control, nonlinear systems, collision avoidance 

1 Introduction 

This paper addresses the challenge of controlling dynam-ical systems to ensure safety and grace simultaneously. The research is motivated by the growing use of con-trol barrier function (CBF) methods to ensure safety. These methods work by ensuring the forward invari-ance of user-defined safe sets in state space, meaning that if a given system is initialized within a safe set, it is guaranteed to remain within it. Practical examples of safety-critical control include avoiding unsafe inter-vehicle spacing on highways [33], excessive temperatures in battery packs [36], hazardous airplane flight altitudes [32], etc. Unfortunately, there are many practical sce-narios where a given system’s safe set is breached due to factors such as large external disturbances, compo-nent failures, etc. For instance, safe inter-vehicle spac-ing can be compromised when another vehicle “cuts in” too close in front of an ego vehicle. Similarly, safe bat-tery pack temperatures can be compromised when a bat-

⋆ This paper was not presented at any IFAC meeting. Cor-responding author: Hosam K. Fathy. Tel. +1(301)405-6617. 

Email addresses : aymoon@umd.edu, borosz@umich.edu, 

> c

hfathy@umd.edu 

tery cell within a pack catches fire, perhaps due to an event such as nail penetration. In such scenarios, a criti-cal need arises for additional graceful safety assurances. We define grace , in this context, as the ability to provide a multi-layered safety guarantee, where if the primary safety layer is breached, a secondary failsafe layer re-mains forward-invariant. One particularly inspiring ex-ample is the graceful landing of US Airways Flight 1549 following an engine failure on January 15, 2009 [38]. The pilot succeeded in achieving the failsafe goal of landing gracefully in the Hudson river, even when the primary goal of maintaining a safe altitude was no longer viable. There is a rich existing literature on CBF-based safety-critical control. Two main classes of CBFs are defined, namely, zeroing and reciprocal CBFs [4, 5, 7, 54]. Zero-ing and reciprocal CBFs deem a given system “safe” if a user-defined barrier function is positive or finite, respec-tively. Safety is then ensured by preventing this func-tion from becoming negative or infinite over time, re-spectively. Building on these core foundations, the lit-erature explores fundamental topics such as ensuring finite-time convergence to safety [28] as well as design-ing exponential [37], high-order [49], backstepping [12], robust [20, 29, 2], adaptive [44, 50], and stochastic [11, 

Preprint submitted to Automatica March 5, 2026 

> arXiv:2603.03497v1 [eess.SY] 3 Mar 2026

17, 40, 41] CBFs. The literature also explores the in-tersection between safety-critical control and machine learning [46, 51, 52, 56], reinforcement learning [8, 10], episodic learning [13, 43], and Bayesian learning [17, 27]. In addition to this theoretical research, there is an exten-sive literature on different applications of safety-critical control. Major application domains include automotive and robotic systems, where CBFs are used for adaptive and connected cruise control [5, 7, 9, 23, 33], lane keep-ing, [7, 26, 55], safe car racing [14, 58], intersection con-trol [30], connected/automated vehicle control [3, 22], motion control of mobile robots [15], obstacle avoid-ance [39], robot collision avoidance [25, 31], robot nav-igation [1, 18], and robot traffic merging [53]. Beyond these fields, safety control also has applications in areas as diverse as battery management [21, 45] and biomedi-cal systems [6, 35, 57]. Traditional CBF methods have both strengths and limitations. On the one hand, these methods typically furnish switching control laws capable of prioritizing other control design objectives, such as reference track-ing, when possible [48], while prioritizing safety when it is critical to do so [19]. On the other hand, the existing literature predominantly embraces a single-layer, black-and-white separation between “safe” and “unsafe” states. Unfortunately, this mindset does not automatically address the need for multi-layered safety guarantees, despite the fact that this need is ubiquitous in practice. In the automotive and battery domains, for instance, there is a distinction between “unsafe” sce-narios where inter-vehicle spacing becomes tight or one battery cell catches fire, versus “catastrophes” where vehicles collide or a cell fire cascades into a multi-cell thermal runaway. “Grace” can be intuitively defined as a system’s ability to prevent unsafe scenarios from becoming catastrophic [16, 24, 42, 47]. Previous work by the authors shows that CBF methods do not always achieve such grace [34, 36]. The main goal of this paper is to extend earlier, prelim-inary research by the authors [34, 36] into a framework for designing graceful safety controllers. This framework utilizes a single constraint to enforce a two-layer defini-tion of safety. This produces safety guarantees that are analogous to simultaneously enforcing a zeroing CBF around a primary safety boundary and a reciprocal CBF around a secondary failsafe boundary. We prove these guarantees for systems with a relative degree of either 1 or 2. This is especially important for mechanical sys-tems, where safety is often defined in terms of position variables, but actuation often involves manipulating ac-celeration, leading to a relative degree of 2. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-tion 2 surveys some key mathematical foundations from the existing literature. Section 3 then presents a wall col-lision example that motivates the need for graceful safety control, especially for systems of relative degree 2. Sec-tion 4 then presents and analyzes the proposed graceful safety control framework, while Section 5 applies this framework to the wall collision avoidance example. Fi-nally, Section 6 summarizes the paper’s conclusions. 

2 Mathematical Background 

We begin by introducing background information on reciprocal, zeroing, high-order, and exponential CBFs based on the existing literature, see e.g., [4, 5, 7, 37, 49]. Specifically, consider a dynamic system governed by the state-space model: 

˙x(t) = f (x, u), (1) where f : Rn × Rm → Rn is a locally Lipschitz function. The symbols x ∈ X ⊆ Rn and u ∈ U ⊆ Rm represent the state and input vectors, respectively, with X and 

U denoting the sets of admissible states and inputs. The literature often makes two assumptions regarding the above dynamics. The first assumption is that for any initial state x(0) ∈ X, there exists a unique solu-tion to the system over a maximum interval of existence, 

I(x(0)) = [0 , τ ). This is often referred to as forward com-pleteness. The second assumption is that the system dy-namics are input affine, i.e., the function f (x, u) can be written as f (x, u) = fa(x) + ga(x)u. This is useful for posing safety control as a convex program. In order to ensure the safety of the system, one can en-force the forward invariance of a safe set. This means that if x(0) starts inside of the safe set, x(t) will stay in-side of the safe set for all t ∈ I(x(0)) . In the CBF litera-ture, the safe set S ⊆ Rn is defined as the superlevel set of a continuously differentiable function h(x) : Rn → R.In other words, the safe set S consists of state variables for which h(x) ≥ 0. More precisely, we write 

S = {x ∈ Rn : h(x) ≥ 0},∂S = {x ∈ Rn : h(x) = 0 },

Int( S) = {x ∈ Rn : h(x) > 0}.

(2) That is, the boundary of the safe set ∂S (i.e., the line distinguishing safety vs. lack thereof) is at h(x) = 0 . If the state x makes h(x) positive, then it lies strictly in-side the interior Int( S) of the set S. Both reciprocal and zeroing CBFs guarantee the forward invariance of the safe set by appropriately designing an extended class-K

function α(r) : R → R, i.e., a monotonically increasing function with α(0) = 0 .

2.1 Zeroing Control Barrier Function 

A zeroing CBF ensures safe set invariance by changing the sign of the CBF at the safe set boundary [4]. The definition of zeroing CBF is introduced below. 2Definition 1. Consider the control system (1) and the safe set ( 2) for the continuously differentiable function 

h(x). Suppose there exist an extended class-K function α

such that 

sup 

> u∈U

[ ˙h(x, u)

]

> −α(h(x)) , (3) 

∀x ∈ S, then h(x) : Rn → R is a zeroing CBF. 

Based on Definition 1 one may formulate the following theorem. 

Theorem 1. Consider a continuously differentiable ze-roing CBF h(x) for the control system (1) . Then, any locally Lipschitz continuous controller u(x) that satisfies 

˙h(x, u) ≥ − α(h(x)) , (4) 

guarantees the forward invariance of S.

One may notice that a strict inequality is used in (3) while equality is used in (4). The former one is required for ensuring Lipschitz continuity of the controller while the latter is used in quadratic programs when synthesiz-ing safety-critical controllers [3]. We also remark that most often the linear function 

α(r) := γr is chosen leading to the condition 

˙h(x, u) ≥ − γh (x). (5) 

2.2 Reciprocal Control Barrier Function 

Reciprocal CBFs are typically represented by the symbol 

B(x) in literature and are defined inside the safe set (i.e., on Int( S)). These prevent the state from leaving the safe set by becoming infinite at the boundary ∂S of the safe set. Hence, 

inf  

> x∈Int( S)

B(x) > 0, lim  

> x→∂S

B(x) → ∞ . (6) The definition of the reciprocal CBF used to enforce the forward invariance of Int( S), is stated below. 

Definition 2. Consider the control system (1) and the safe set ( 2) for the continuously differentiable function 

h(x). Suppose there exist extended class-K functions 

α1, α 2, α 3 such that 

1

α1(h(x)) ≤ B(x) ≤ 1

α2(h(x)) ,

inf 

> u∈U

[ ˙B(x, u)

]

≤ α3 (h(x)) ,

(7) 

∀x ∈ Int( S). Then B(x) : Int( S) → R is a reciprocal CBF. 

Given Definition 2, one may formulate the following theorem. 

Theorem 2. Consider a continuously differentiable re-ciprocal CBF B(x) for the control system (1) on the safe set (2). Then, any locally Lipschitz continuous controller 

u that satisfies 

˙B(x, u) ≤ α3 (h(x)) , (8) 

guarantees the forward invariance of Int( S).

Note that a ‘canonical’ reciprocal CBF can be defined as 

B(x) = 1

h(x) , (9) in which case the first line of (7) trivially holds. 

2.3 High-order and Exponential Control Barrier Func-tions 

In many applications it occurs that the derivative in (3), i.e., ˙h(x, u) = ∇h(x) ˙ x = ∇h(x)f (x, u), (10) does not depend on the control input u, i.e., we have 

˙h(x), rendering the set (4) empty and making safety-critical control design infeasible. In control affine systems with right hand side f (x, u) = fa(x) + ga(x)u, this boils down to ∇h(x)ga(x) ≡ 0, which is often referred as a relative degree 2 (or higher) system. This issue can be resolved by defining the high-order CBF [49]: 

h2(x) := ˙h(x) + α(h(x)) . (11) Then one can ensure h2(x) ≥ 0, which holds on the set 

S2 = {x ∈ Rn : ˙h(x) + α(h(x)) ≥ 0}, (12) by requiring 

˙h2(x, u) ≥ − α2(h2(x)) , (13) where α2 is an extended class-K function. Then, it can be proven [49] that any locally Lipschitz continuous controller u(x) satisfying (13) renders the set S ∩ S2

forward invariant. Note that here the extended class-

K function α needs to be differentiable. Moreover, the above method can be extended to higher relative degrees, by differentiating the CBFs until the inputs appear in the derivative. A special case of high-order CBF is called exponential CBF [4, 37], which is obtained by considering linear func-tions, that is, α(r) := γ1r and α2(r) := γ2r. Then, (11) and (13) lead to 

h2(x) := ˙h(x) + γ1h(x), (14) 3Figure 1. Mechanical model used for the illustrative examples in this paper. 

and ˙h2(x, u) ≥ − γ2h2(x), (15) yielding ¨h + ( γ1 + γ2) ˙h + γ1γ2h ≥ 0, (16) where we dropped the arguments for simplicity. One may observe that (16) is a second-order overdamped dynam-ical system for h with negative characteristic roots −γ1

and −γ2.It is important to emphasize that the corresponding safety-critical controller guarantees the forward invari-ance of S ∩ S2, not S. As shown in Section 3, for me-chanical system interpretations, this amounts to guaran-teeing the forward invariance of a speed-dependent safe distance constraint. 

3 Motivating examples 

This section motivates the paper’s graceful safety control approach by presenting two simulation examples high-lighting some of the limitations of the above traditional approaches. Both examples focus on a simple wall col-lision avoidance problem, but the intent is to motivate a mathematical framework broadly applicable to other systems. Fig. 1 presents the basic setting for this prob-lem. An object (e.g., a point mass) with location x(t)

translates in a 1-dimensional space, and must avoid col-lision with a wall at some location xw. A baseline con-troller attempts to move the object towards a desired location xd on the other side of the wall, but this loca-tion is infeasible because of the above collision avoidance need. In both simulation examples, the primary defini-tion of safety is that the object should ideally be located at a safe distance from the wall, i.e., x(t) ≥ xsf , where 

xsf > x w. The main difference between the two exam-ples is the choice of mathematical model, and the im-pact of this choice on relative degree. The first example assumes that the velocity ˙x(t) of the object can be actu-ated directly, leading to a first-order differential equa-tion and a relative degree of 1. In contrast, the second example assumes that the acceleration ¨x(t) of the object is the control input, leading to a second order differen-tial equation and a relative degree of 2. 

3.1 Example #1: a first-order zeroing CBF 

Suppose that the velocity of the above object can be ma-nipulated directly, as a control input. This corresponds             

> Table 1 List of Parameters used in Example #1 Symbol Definition Value
> xdDesired target location 0 m
> xwWall location 1 m
> xsf Safe distance 3 m
> kBaseline control policy gain 0.5 s −1
> γCBF gain 3 s −1

to the first-order differential equation 

˙x = u. (17) For simplicity, omit the input bounds, that is, assume 

u ∈ R. Also, consider the baseline control policy 

ud = −k(x − xd), (18) whose goal is to bring the object to the desired target location xd using the control gain k. In the absence of safety-critical control, this will cause a collision between the object and the wall. To prevent this, consider the safe set: 

S = {x ∈ R : x ≥ xsf }, (19) and construct the simple CBF candidate: 

h(x) = x − xsf , (20) where the positivity of h implies the object’s safety. Sub-stituting this into (5) yields 

u ≥ − γ(x − xsf ) =: usf , (21) where γ is a user-defined constant. Finally, we construct an optimization problem, where the goal is to minimize the difference between the de-sired and actual control inputs, subject to the CBF-based safety constraint: 

min 

> u∈R

12 (u − ud)2,

s.t. u ≥ usf ,

(22) where ud and usf are defined in (18) and (21). Applying the KKT conditions, this quadratic problem (QP) has the analytical solution 

u∗ = max {ud, u sf }

= max {− k(x − xd), −γ(x − xsf )}. (23) Putting this into (17) gives the closed-loop dynamics. The above example problem is simulated in MATLAB using the “ode15s” function, with an 8-second time hori-zon, a time step of 1 ms, and the parameter values in 4Figure 2. Position & velocity for baseline zeroing CBF 

> Figure 3. Value of the barrier function & velocity vs. position plot for baseline zeroing CBF

Table 1. Different initial positions of x(0) = 2 m, 5 m, 7 m, and 10 m are used to place the object within the unsafe or safe sets. Figure 2 plots the object’s position and velocity for this example while Fig. 3 shows the value of the barrier func-tion (20) and the trajectory in phase space. When the object is placed at x(0) = 2 m , due to its unsafe initial state, the controller applies a positive velocity. As a re-sult, the object approaches xsf , and the barrier function converges exponentially to 0. Second, for x(0) = 5 m ,

x(0) = 7 m and x(0) = 10 m , the controller first applies the desired velocity from (18) to move the object toward the desired position xd. As the object moves closer to the safety boundary at xsf , the controller switches to the safe input profile (21) to prevent collision. The resulting phase space plot is a piecewise linear trajectory with a slope of −k for the desired velocity control and −γ for the safe velocity control. The above simulation results illustrate some of the key strengths of traditional zeroing CBFs. For exam-ple, the zeroing CBF succeeds in maintaining system safety as long as the initial object position is safe. More-over, the zeroing CBF succeeds in bringing the object exponentially back towards safety if the initial condi-tion is unsafe. This simulation study also highlights a well-recognized limitation of zeroing CBF methods. In particular, the fact that the safety control prob-lem statement involves directly actuating the object’s velocity, which is unrealistic in practical mechanical systems, where the actuation commands are typically forces and/or accelerations. This motivates the next simulation example, where acceleration is treated as the control input variable, leading to a relative degree of 2. 

3.2 Example #2: a second-order exponential CBF 

Suppose that the control input in the wall collision avoid-ance problem is acceleration, as opposed to velocity. This corresponds to the second-order differential equation 

¨x = u, (24) and indeed this system has two states, that is, x = ( x, ˙x).Again, for simplicity, omit the input bounds and as-sume u ∈ R. Furthermore, consider the new baseline con-troller: 

ud = −k1(x − xd) − k2 ˙x, (25) where k1 and k2 are user-selected position and velocity feedback terms, respectively. Now consider the problem of ensuring the safety of the above object while utiliz-ing the same barrier function (20) as in the previous ex-ample. Due to having a relative degree of 2 we build a high-order, specifically an exponential CBF (15) which results in 

h2(x, ˙x) = ˙ x + γ1(x − xsf ), (26) yielding the set 

S2 = {(x, ˙x) ∈ R2 : ˙ x ≥ − γ1(x − xsf )}. (27) The safety constraint (15), (16) becomes 

u ≥ − γ1γ2(x − xsf ) − (γ1 + γ2) ˙ x =: usf , (28) which ensures the forward invariance of the set 

S∩S2 = {(x, ˙x) ∈ R2 : x ≥ xsf , ˙x ≥ − γ1(x−xsf )}. (29) In this case the QP (22) can be formulated the same way, keeping in mind that the control input u now represents acceleration rather than velocity. Now, solving the KKT condition yields the controller 

u∗ = max {ud, u sf }

= max {− k1(x − xd) − k2 ˙x, 

− γ1γ2(x − xsf ) − (γ1 + γ2) ˙ x},

(30) 5Table 2 Additional Parameters used in Example #2 Symbol Definition Value         

> k1Baseline proportional gain 1 s −2
> k2Baseline differential gain 2 s −1
> γ11st-order CBF gain 4.5 s −1
> γ22nd-order CBF gain 0.5 s −1

with ud and usf defined in (25) and (28). Substituting this into (24) leads to the closed-loop system. As in the previous example, the above safety controller is simulated in MATLAB using the “ode15s” function. The same 8-second time horizon with a time step of 1 ms and the same parameter values for xd, xw, and xsf are implemented as before, with additional parameter val-ues listed in Table 2. The controller is simulated using four different initial position values of 2 m , 5 m , 7 m , and 

10 m while the initial object velocity is set as −25 m /s.Now, these initial positions represent an extremely un-safe distance, two slightly unsafe distances, and a safe distance, respectively. Figure 4 plots the object’s position, velocity, and ac-celeration over time, while Fig. 5 shows the value of the barrier functions and the phase plane plot. In the phase plane plot, the orange dotted line represents 

h2(x, ˙x) = 0 , that is, ˙x = −γ1(x − xsf ), cf. (26). Lastly, once the object collides with the wall, the remainder of the corresponding simulation is plotted as a gray dashed curve instead of a solid colored curve. As seen in these figures, when x(0) = 2 m and x(0) = 5 m , the controller fails to prevent wall collisions. The above collisions illustrate one of the main weak-nesses of traditional exponential safety barriers. This is not a consequence of actuation constraints. In fact, while such constraints are relevant in practical applications, they are deliberately left out of this section’s examples for illustrative reasons. Rather, the culprit for this fail-ure to prevent collisions is more fundamental. From a mathematical perspective, the above exponential safety controller only guarantees the forward invariance of the set S ∩ S2 given in (29). Intuitively, this translates to a position- and velocity-dependent definition of what this paper describes as the “primary” safety boundary. When the initial velocity of the object is too large in magnitude and negative, even if the initial position of the object is “safe” (based on the definition of h(x)), the “primary” safety boundary is breached, and the exponential safety controller is no longer guaranteed to prevent collisions with the wall. This motivates the focus of this paper on adding one more, “failsafe” safety boundary. The core idea behind graceful safety control, as described in the next section, is to ensure that this failsafe boundary con-tinues to be honored at all moments in time, even if the primary safety boundary is breached. 

> Figure 4. State & input trajectories for the controller based on the exponential CBF

4 Graceful safety control 

This section proposes a first- and second-order grace-ful safety control policies. We begin by presenting the first-order policy and proving its ability to achieve grace-ful control. Then we extend this policy to second-order, which allows the application of this framework to sys-tems of relative degree 2. 

4.1 First-order graceful safety control framework 

Consider a dynamic system governed by (1). Suppose that this system has a relative degree of 1. Moreover, suppose that there exists a continuously differentiable function H : Rn → R that can be used for defining sys-tem safety. In particular, suppose that there exist two boundaries associated with H(x): a primary boundary at H(x) = b below which the system is in “danger”, and a secondary boundary at H(x) = a, where a < b , be-low which the system experiences a safety “catastrophe”. The specific values of the safety thresholds, a and b,are problem-dependent. However, one can construct an affine transformation to shift these boundaries as 

hg (x) = H(x) − bb − a . (31) 6Figure 5. Barrier & phase plot for the controller based on the exponential CBF 

Based on the above transformation, a given sys-tem is “safe” when hg (x) ≥ 0, in “danger” when 

−1 < h g (x) < 0, and “catastrophic” when hg (x) ≤ − 1.In other words, the above definitions of H(x) and hg (x)

correspond to a multi-layered definition of safety: an essential prerequisite to graceful safety control. This multi-layered definition is stated formally below. 

Definition 3. Consider the system in (1) and the con-tinuously differentiable function hg (x) : Rn → R, then the system’s primary safe set S, secondary failsafe set 

D, and catastrophically unsafe set C are defined as 

S = {x ∈ Rn : hg (x) ≥ 0},D = {x ∈ Rn : −1 < h g (x) < 0},C = {x ∈ Rn : hg (x) ≤ − 1}.

(32) We propose to achieve graceful safety control by impos-ing the constraint 

˙hg (x, u) ≥ − β

( hg (x)

hg (x) + 1 

)

, (33) at every instant in time, where β is an extended class-K

function. For simplicity, we will choose β(r) = γr in the examples detailed below. Fig. 6 visualizes the right-hand side of the constraint (33) for β(r) = r.-2 0 2 4 6 8 10         

> -2 024
> Figure 6. Illustrating the inequality (33) for β(r) = r.-1 -0.5 00.5 11.5 2
> 0123
> Figure 7. Lyapunov function candidate (34)

The constraint (33) achieves two goals simultaneously. First, it functions as a zeroing CBF around hg = 0 . Sec-ond, it provides a stiffening response to increasing safety violations that becomes infinitely large in the limit as hg

approaches −1. Together, these two properties provide a multi-layered graceful safety guarantee, as shown below. 

Remark: While the above general setup does not re-quire it, it is reasonable to construct hg (x) such that 

∇hg (x) < 0 for x ∈ ∂S ∪ D ∪ ∂C , cf. (32). This ensures as the system goes from the primary safety boundary 

∂S , given by hg (x) = 0 , toward the boundary of catas-trophe ∂C , given by hg (x) = −1, within the failsafe set 

D, there is a “sense of increasing danger”. 

4.2 First-order graceful safety guarantees 

The graceful safety controller in (33) has three impor-tant properties, as stated in the following theorems. 

Theorem 3. Consider a continuously differentiable function hg (x) constructed as in (31) for the control system (1) . Then, any locally Lipschitz continuous con-troller u(x) that satisfies (33) guarantees the forward invariance of S.Proof. The proof follows directly from the fact that hg

satisfies the definition of a zeroing CBF. In particular, the right-hand side of (33) is an extended class-K func-tion of hg , since β and r/ (r + 1) are extended class-K

functions and the composition of them is an extended class-K function. 

Remark: Intuitively, the above theorem asserts that the proposed graceful controller inherits the properties of traditional zeroing CBFs around the primary safety 7boundary ∂S . In other words, the primary safe set S is guaranteed to be forward invariant. 

Theorem 4. Suppose that (33) holds and x(0) ∈ D,i.e., −1 < h g (x(0)) < 0. Then x(t) ∈ S ∪ D, that is, 

hg (x(t)) > −1 for all t ≥ 0, and x(t) converges to ∂S ,that is, lim t→∞ hg (x(t)) = 0 .Proof. Consider the Lyapunov candidate function 

V (hg ) = hg − ln( hg + 1) , (34) depicted in Fig. 7. This function equals zero if and only if 

hg = 0 , and is otherwise positive. Moreover, the deriva-tive of this Lyapunov candidate function is given by 

˙V = ˙hg − ˙hg

|hg + 1 | . (35) For hg > −1 we have |hg + 1 | = hg + 1 , which results in 

˙V = ˙hg

(

1 − 1

hg + 1 

)

= ˙hg

hg

hg + 1 . (36) Multiplying both sides of the inequality (33) with 

hg /(hg + 1) < 0 yields 

˙hg

hg

hg + 1 ≤ − β

( hg

hg + 1 

) hg

hg + 1 . (37) Comparing (35) and (37) results in 

˙V ≤ − η

( hg

hg + 1 

)

, (38) where η is a class-K function. Therefore, exploiting that 

−1 < h g < 0, we obtain ˙V < 0. Since the time deriva-tive of the Lyapunov candidate function is negative at all points where the function is nonzero implies that hg = 0 

is asymptotically stable. This implies that S ∪ D is for-ward invariant and that the systems converges to ∂S as 

t → ∞ , which completes the proof. 

Remark: Intuitively, the above theorem asserts that as long as the system is initialized in the failsafe set D, it is guaranteed to avoid catastrophic failure. This is a con-sequence of the “stiffening” feedback effect provided by the nonlinear safety constraint (33). In fact, one can in-tuitively think of this stiffening effect as being analogous to a reciprocal CBF around hg = −1.

Remark: The above choice of Lyapunov candidate function is inspired by the fact that the nonlinear term in the proposed safety constraint acts in a manner anal-ogous to a stiffening actuator (e.g., a stiffening spring) in the limit as hg → − 1. In fact, the Lyapunov candidate 0 1 2 3 4

Time [sec]   

> -1 -0.5 0
> Bound on h g
> Figure 8. Evolution of the bound on hgover time

function (34) was constructed by analytically integrat-ing the area under the function hg /(hg + 1) starting with hg = 0 , in a manner analogous to computing the energy stored in a stiffening spring as a function of de-flection. This analogy is particularly valuable for the extension of the proposed graceful controller to systems of relative degree 2, as discussed further below. 

Remark: To gain further insight into the above mono-tonic convergence towards safety, one may consider equality and the linear function β(r) = γr in (33): 

dhg

dt = −γ hg

hg + 1 . (39) This can be solved using the separation of variables: 

∫ hg (τ ) 

> hg(0)

hg + 1 

hg

dhg = −γ

∫ τ

> 0

dtτ = − 1

γ

(hg (τ ) + ln |hg (τ )| − hg (0) − ln |hg (0) |).

(40) The function hg (τ ) + ln |hg (τ )| is monotonic in terms of 

τ . Therefore, according to the comparison lemma, the above implicit equation provides a monotonic bound on the evolution of hg (τ ) versus time. This bound rein-forces the insight that the proposed graceful safety con-troller returns monotonically towards the primary safety boundary if it is breached. Fig. 8 illustrates this behavior by plotting the bound on hg given by (40) as a function of time for different initial violations of the primary safety condition. Graceful safety control, in this case, imposes monotonic bounds on convergence towards the primary safe set. If ∇hg (x) < 0 for x ∈ ∂S ∪ D ∪ ∂C also holds, this monotonicity also results in a ”streamlined” flow in state space. 

4.3 Second-order graceful safety control framework 

This section extends the core idea behind graceful safety control to systems of relative degree 2. Specifically, we consider the second-order exponential barrier constraint in (16) as a motivation. Suppose that the lowest-order term in this constraint is replaced with a stiffening term, 8analogous to (33) with β(r) = γ1r, to furnish the follow-ing nonlinear second-order constraint 

¨hg + ( γ1 + γ2) ˙hg + γ1γ2

hg

hg + 1 ≥ 0, (41) Alternatively, one can express this equation in a more general form: 

¨hg + 2 ζω n ˙hg + ω2n

hg

hg + 1 ≥ 0. (42) The structure of the above constraint is analogous to a nonlinear mass-spring-damper system where the term 

hg /(hg + 1) provides a stiffening effect. Moreover, when this inequality is linearized around hg (x) = 0 , it becomes analogous to a standard mass-spring damper with a nat-ural frequency ωn and a damping ratio ζ. One can even make γ1 and γ2 a complex conjugate pair (with nega-tive real parts) which corresponds to 0 < ζ < 1, i.e., an underdamped system. In general, we consider that ˙hg (x, u) does not depend on 

u, i.e., we have ˙hg (x). Then we impose the constraint 

˙hg (x, u) ≥ − 2ζω n ˙hg (x) − ω2n

hg (x)

hg (x) + 1 . (43) with ζ > 0 and ωn > 0 to guarantee graceful safety. 

4.4 Second-order graceful safety guarantees 

The above second-order inequality provides two differ-ent safety guarantees, as shown below. 

Theorem 5. Suppose that (43) holds and x(0) ∈ D,i.e., −1 < h g (x(0)) < 0. Then x(t) ∈ S ∪ D, that is, 

hg (x(t)) > −1 for all t ≥ 0, and x(t) converges to ∂S ,that is, lim t→∞ hg (x(t)) = 0 .Proof. We begin by constructing the following Lyapunov candidate function 

V (hg , ˙hg ) = 12 ˙h2

> g

(

1 − Θ( ˙hg

))

+ ω2n

(hg − ln( hg + 1) ),

(44) where Θ denotes the unit step function, that is, 

Θ( x) = 

{1, if x ≥ 0,

0, if x < 0, ⇒ 1 − Θ( x) = 

{0, if x ≥ 0,

1, if x < 0.

(45) This Lyapunov candidate function is continuously dif-ferentiable, since the first derivative of this function with respect to ˙hg exists everywhere (while the second deriva-tive does not exist at ˙hg = 0 ). Moreover, V = 0 when 

hg = 0 and ˙hg ≥ 0 and V > 0 otherwise. The structure of this Lyapunov candidate function is analogous to a potential energy term plus a kinetic energy term that is computed only when ˙hg < 0.When ˙hg > 0, the time derivative of (44) this candidate function is given by 

˙V = ω2n

(

1 − 1

|hg + 1 |

)

˙hg = ω2n

hg

hg + 1 ˙hg , (46) where the last equality holds since −1 < h g < 0. This derivative is guaranteed to be negative. Moreover, when 

˙hg < 0, the time derivative of the Lyapunov candidate function becomes 

˙V =

(

¨hg + ω2n

hg

hg + 1 

)

˙hg , (47) where, again, we exploited −1 < h g < 0. According to (42), the expression within the parenthesis is larger than 

−2ζω n ˙hg Since ˙hg is negative, it follows that ˙V < 0 and according to Lyapunov’s theorem hg = 0 is asymptoti-cally stable. This implies that S ∪ D is forward invariant and that the systems converges to ∂S as t → ∞ , which completes the proof. 

Remark: The above result is essentially a failsafe guar-antee associated with the proposed controller. It implies that even if the controller’s primary safety threshold is breached, the controller guarantees that the failsafe threshold at hg = −1 is not be breached, regardless of 

˙hg . This result is a consequence of the stiffening behav-ior of the feedback term hg /(hg + 1) as hg approaches 

−1, and is essential to this paper’s notion of graceful safety-critical control. Interestingly, this graceful guar-antee does not require ζ > 1, meaning that it exists even if the control design parameter ζ provides underdamped linearized behavior around hg = 0 .The following theorem shows that for 0 < ζ < 1 the for-ward invariance of the primary safety set is guaranteed. 

Theorem 6. Suppose that (43) holds and suppose that 

ζ > 1 and ωn > 0. Then the two sets 

Sg, 1 = {x ∈ Rn : hg (x)) ≥ 0, ˙hg (x) + γ1hg (x)) ≥ 0},Sg, 2 = {x ∈ Rn : hg (x)) ≥ 0, ˙hg (x) + γ2hg (x)) ≥ 0},

(48) 

are both forward invariant, where γ1 and γ2 are the real solutions of the characteristic equation 

λ2 + 2 ζω nλ + ω2n = 0 . (49) 

Proof. If ζ > 1 and ωn > 0, then the characteristic equa-tion (49) has two negative real eigenvalues. Denoting 9these eigenvalues by −γ1 and −γ2, one can write (43) (or equivalently (42)) into the form (41). If x ∈ Sg, 1 or x ∈ Sg, 2, based on the definitions in (48), we have hg ≥ 0. This implies that hg ≥ hg /(hg + 1) ,leading to the inequality 

¨hg + ( γ1 + γ2) ˙hg + γ1γ2hg ≥ 0. (50) Now define the following two functions 

hg, 1 := ˙hg + γ1hg ,hg. 2 := ˙hg + γ2hg . (51) Plugging these into (50) yields 

˙hg, 1 + γ1hg, 1 ≥ 0,

˙hg, 2 + γ2hg, 2 ≥ 0. (52) These inequalities guarantee the forward invariance of the sets Sg, 1 and Sg, 2 defined in (48). This completes the proof. 

Remark: Intuitively, the above theorem provides a con-servative estimate of two forward invariant sets for the proposed controller. The forward invariance of these two sets is analogous to the safety guarantees associated with second-order exponential CBFs. Also, one can intuitively interpret this result a velocity-dependent safe distance guarantee. This serves as the primary safety guarantee for the proposed controller. 

5 Simulation Study - Graceful Safety Control 

In this section, a simulation study is conducted using the same example as in Sec. 3, see Fig. 1, for both the first- and second-order graceful safety controllers. The simulation results clearly demonstrate that both of the proposed safety controllers are able to achieve “grace” in the system by successfully preventing the object from colliding with the wall, unlike the second-order motivat-ing example. 

5.1 Scenario #1: first-order graceful safety controller 

We first construct the first-order graceful safety con-troller. We begin by defining the following barrier func-tion: 

hg (x) = x − xsf 

xsf − xw

. (53) This barrier function allows the creation of three dif-ferent safety sets, per (32). If the object is placed at 

x ≥ xsf we have hg (x) ≥ 0. This serves as the primary safe layer that enforces the desirable safety condition. If the object’s position is xw < x < x sf then we have 

> Figure 9. Position & velocity for first-order graceful control
> Figure 10. Barrier & velocity vs. position plot for first-order graceful controller

−1 < h g (x) < 0 and the system is considered to be in danger, but not yet catastrophic. When the object col-lides with the wall, i.e., x ≤ xw then hg (x) ≤ − 1. This represents that the secondary failsafe layer is breached, resulting in a catastrophe. Let us consider the first-order differential equation ˙x = u

(cf. (17)) with nominal controller ud = −k(x − xd)

(cf. (18)). Then, the first-order graceful safety condition (33) with class-K function β(r) = γr yields 

˙hg (x, u ) ≥ γ hg (x)

hg (x) + 1 

⇒ u ≥ − γ x − xsf 

x − xw

(xsf − xw) =: usf .

(54) Then one may set up the quadratic program (22) where 

ud and usf are defined in (18) and (54). Using the KKT 10 condition, this yields the analytical solution 

u∗ = max {ud, u sf }

= max {− k(x − xd), −γ x − xsf 

x − xw

(xsf − xw)}, (55) cf. (23). Substituting this into (17) gives the closed-loop dynamics. Figure 9 plots the position and velocity of the object, and Fig. 10 depicts the graceful barrier function and po-sition vs. velocity plot. In the hg graph, the primary safe layer lies above the black dotted line at hg = 0 , while the boundary of the secondary failsafe layer is highlighted by the red dotted line at hg = −1. Similar to the benchmark case, the graceful controller brings the object towards 

xsf regardless of the object’s initial position. A notice-able difference is evident in the position vs. velocity plot. Due to the nonlinearity of the graceful barrier function, the controller implements more aggressive control input values compared to the zeroing CBF benchmark once the object approaches the catastrophic collision condi-tion at xw. This is clearly demonstrated for x(0) = 2 m 

in Fig. 9, where the graceful controller applies a much bigger initial velocity compared to Fig. 2, bringing the object back towards safety faster than the baseline case. 

5.2 Scenario #2: second-order graceful safety control example 

We now present the second-order graceful safety control simulation study. Here we utilize the first-order differ-ential equation ¨x = u (cf. (24)) with nominal controller 

ud = −k1(x − xd) − k2 ˙x (cf. (25)). We construct the second-order graceful CBF by utilizing the same graceful barrier function (53) as for the first-order case. The second-order graceful safety controller (43) yields the safety constraint 

¨hg (x, ˙x, u ) ≥ − 2ζω n ˙hg (x, ˙x) − ω2n

hg (x)

hg (x) + 1 (56) 

⇒ u ≥ − ω2n

x − xsf 

x − xw

(xsf − xw) − 2ζω n ˙x =: usf .

As a result, the optimization problem is constructed as (22) with ud and usf are defined in (25) and (56). Then applying the KKT conditions results in 

u∗ = max {ud, u sf }

= max {− k1(x − xd) − k2 ˙x, 

− ω2n

x − xsf 

x − xw

(xsf − xw) − 2ζω n ˙x},

(57) cf. (30), and substituting this into (24) gives the closed-loop system. 

> Figure 11. Position, velocity, & acceleration for overdamped controller
> Figure 12. Barrier & phase plane plot for overdamped con-troller

For the simulations the parameter ωn is set to 2 rad /s.Both overdamped and underdamped controllers are sim-ulated, using ζ values of 2 and 0.5, respectively. The same initial velocity value of −25 m /s is implemented as for the benchmark case. Also, two different initial po-sition values of 5 m and 2 m are used, which are the cases where the benchmark exponential controller failed to prevent collisions. Figures 11-14 plot the simulation results for the over-11 Figure 13. Position, velocity, & acceleration for under-damped controller 

> Figure 14. Barrier & phase plane plot for underdamped con-troller

and underdamped graceful safety controllers. In the hg

plots, the black dotted line and the red dotted line rep-resent the boundaries of the primary safe layer and the secondary failsafe layer, respectively. As shown in these figures, in all scenarios, the graceful safety controller successfully avoids collision and brings the object’s position towards xsf by utilizing very high acceleration values. The maximum acceleration im-posed by the controller is quite large but finite (namely, 

∼ 10 −8 m/s2). This is consistent with the fact that the catastrophic boundary at hg = −1, which corresponds to an infinite value of the Lyapunov candidate function used earlier in this article for analyzing the properties of the controller, is approached but never reached. At least three interesting distinctions are visible between the under- and overdamped graceful safety controllers. First, the overdamped controller always returns to safety exponentially, whereas the underdamped controller ex-hibits more oscillatory behavior, as expected. Second, the overdamped controller applies peak accelerations of 

3400 m /s2 for x(0) = 2 m and 200 m /s2 for x(0) = 5 m .In contrast, the underdamped controller applies peak ac-celerations of 4500 m /s2 for x(0) = 2 m and 5500 m /s2

for x(0) = 5 m . Third, the underdamped controller re-turns the system to safety faster than the overdamped controller. These tradeoffs, while may not be surpris-ing, highlight the potential value of treating the graceful safety controller’s damping ratio as one of multiple tun-able controller design parameters. Overall, these simu-lation results successfully prove the effectiveness of the proposed controller and motivate the need for “grace” in safety-critical control. 

6 Conclusion 

Control barrier functions (CBFs) are widely used in the safe control literature due to their rigorous safety guar-antee and natural switching control ability. However, the existing literature on CBFs creates a single definition of what it means to be in an unsafe state, while there exist multiple layers of safety in practice. To address this gap, a graceful safety control framework was intro-duced in this paper. The proposed framework utilizes a nonlinear barrier function to define a primary desired safety layer and a secondary failsafe layer, then imposes zeroing and reciprocal CBF-like conditions on them, re-spectively. The effectiveness of the proposed controller is demonstrated via mathematical proofs and simula-tion studies. In the present study, only first and second-order graceful safety control was considered for simplic-ity. One potential topic for future work is generalizing these findings to systems with even higher relative de-grees, thereby extending its applicability and versatility. 

Acknowledgment 

Support for this research was provided by the U.S. Na-tional Science Foundation (NSF). The authors gratefully acknowledge this support. This paper reflects the opin-ions of the authors, not NSF. 12 References 

[1] Ayush Agrawal and Koushil Sreenath. Discrete con-trol barrier functions for safety-critical control of discrete systems with application to bipedal robot navigation. In Robotics: Science and Systems , vol-ume 13, pages 1–10, 2017. [2] Anil Alan, Tamas G Molnar, Aaron D Ames, and Gábor Orosz. Generalizing robust control bar-rier functions from a controller design perspective. 

IEEE Open Journal of Control Systems , 4:54–69, 2025. [3] Anil Alan, Andrew J Taylor, Chaozhe R He, Aaron D Ames, and Gábor Orosz. Control barrier functions and input-to-state safety with application to automated vehicles. IEEE Transactions on Con-trol Systems Technology , 2023. [4] Aaron D Ames, Samuel Coogan, Magnus Egerstedt, Gennaro Notomista, Koushil Sreenath, and Paulo Tabuada. Control barrier functions: Theory and applications. In 18th European Control Conference (ECC) , pages 3420–3431. IEEE, 2019. [5] Aaron D Ames, Jessy W Grizzle, and Paulo Tabuada. Control barrier function based quadratic programs with application to adaptive cruise con-trol. In 53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control , pages 6271–6278. IEEE, 2014. [6] Aaron D Ames, Tamás G Molnár, Andrew W Sin-gletary, and Gábor Orosz. Safety-critical control of active interventions for COVID-19 mitigation. 

IEEE Access , 8:188454–188474, 2020. [7] Aaron D Ames, Xiangru Xu, Jessy W Grizzle, and Paulo Tabuada. Control barrier function based quadratic programs for safety critical sys-tems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control ,62(8):3861–3876, 2017. [8] Richard Cheng, Gábor Orosz, Richard M Murray, and Joel W Burdick. End-to-end safe reinforcement learning through barrier functions for safety-critical continuous control tasks. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 33, pages 3387–3395, 2019. [9] Caio IG Chinelato and Bruno A Angélico. Safe adaptive cruise control with control barrier function and Smith predictor. In Congresso Brasileiro de Automática-CBA , volume 2, 2020. [10] Jason Choi, Fernando Castaneda, Claire J Tomlin, and Koushil Sreenath. Reinforcement learning for safety-critical control under model uncertainty, us-ing control Lyapunov functions and control barrier functions. In Robotics: Science and Systems , vol-ume 10, pages 1–9, 2020. [11] Andrew Clark. Control barrier functions for com-plete and incomplete information stochastic sys-tems. In American Control Conference (ACC) ,pages 2928–2935. IEEE, 2019. [12] Max H Cohen, Tamás G Molnár, and Aaron D Ames. Safety-critical control for autonomous sys-tems: Control barrier functions via reduced-order models. Annual Reviews in Control , 57:100947, 2024. [13] Noel Csomay-Shanklin, Ryan K Cosner, Min Dai, Andrew J Taylor, and Aaron D Ames. Episodic learning for safe bipedal locomotion with control barrier functions and projection-to-state safety. In 

3rd Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference ,pages 1041–1053. PMLR, 2021. [14] James Dallas, John Talbot, Makoto Suminaka, Michael Thompson, Thomas Lew, Gábor Orosz, and John Subosits. Control barrier functions for shared control and vehicle safety. In American Con-trol Conference (ACC) , pages 4103–4210. IEEE, 2025. [15] Manavendra Desai and Azad Ghaffari. Clf-cbf based quadratic programs for safe motion control of nonholonomic mobile robots in presence of moving obstacles. In IEEE/ASME International Confer-ence on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM) ,pages 16–21. IEEE, 2022. [16] Tamsyn E Edwards and Paul U Lee. Towards de-signing graceful degradation into trajectory based operations: A human-machine system integration approach. In 17th AIAA Aviation Technology, In-tegration, and Operations Conference , page 4487, 2017. [17] David D Fan, Jennifer Nguyen, Rohan Thakker, Nikhilesh Alatur, Ali-akbar Agha-mohammadi, and Evangelos A Theodorou. Bayesian learning-based adaptive control for safety critical systems. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 4093–4099. IEEE, 2020. [18] Zhan Gao, Guang Yang, and Amanda Prorok. Learning environment-aware control barrier func-tions for safe and feasible multi-robot navigation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04313 , 2023. [19] Bhavya Giri Goswami, Manan Tayal, Karthik Raj-gopal, Pushpak Jagtap, and Shishir Kolathaya. Col-lision cone control barrier functions: Experimental validation on ugvs for kinematic obstacle avoidance. In American Control Conference (ACC) , pages 325– 331. IEEE, 2024. [20] Thomas Gurriet, Andrew Singletary, Jacob Reher, Laurent Ciarletta, Eric Feron, and Aaron Ames. Towards a framework for realizable safety criti-cal control through active set invariance. In 9th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS) , pages 98–106. IEEE, 2018. [21] Habtamu Hailemichael and Beshah Ayalew. Adap-tive and safe fast charging of lithium-ion batteries via hybrid model learning and control barrier func-tions. Journal of Energy Storage , 129:117056, 2025. [22] Chaozhe R He, Anil Alan, Tamás G Molnár, Sergei S Avedisov, A Harvey Bell, Russell Zukouski, Matthew Hunkler, Jim Yan, and Gábor Orosz. Im-proving fuel economy of heavy-duty vehicles in daily driving. In American Control Conference (ACC) ,pages 2306–2311. IEEE, 2020. 13 [23] Chaozhe R He and Gábor Orosz. Safety guaran-teed connected cruise control. In 21st IEEE Inter-national Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) , pages 549–554. IEEE, 2018. [24] Maurice P Herlihy and Jeannette M Wing. Spec-ifying graceful degradation. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems , 2(1):93–104, 1991. [25] YongKang Hou, Hai Wang, Yanhui Wei, Herbert Ho-Ching Iu, and Tyrone Fernando. Robust adap-tive finite-time tracking control for intervention-auv with input saturation and output constraints using high-order control barrier function. Ocean Engineering , 268:113219, 2023. [26] Chenhuan Jiang, Hanyu Gan, Illés Vörös, Dénes Takács, and Gábor Orosz. Safety filter for lane-keeping control. In Advanced Vehicle Control Sym-posium , pages 371–377. Springer, 2024. [27] Mohammad Javad Khojasteh, Vikas Dhiman, Mas-simo Franceschetti, and Nikolay Atanasov. Prob-abilistic safety constraints for learned high rela-tive degree system dynamics. In 2nd Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference , pages 781–792. PMLR, 2020. [28] Anqi Li, Li Wang, Pietro Pierpaoli, and Magnus Egerstedt. Formally correct composition of coor-dinated behaviors using control barrier certificates. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-gent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 3723–3729. IEEE, 2018. [29] Brett T Lopez, Jean-Jacques E Slotine, and Jonathan P How. Robust adaptive control barrier functions: An adaptive and data-driven approach to safety. IEEE Control Systems Letters , 5(3):1031– 1036, 2020. [30] Haitong Ma, Jianyu Chen, Shengbo Eben, Ziyu Lin, Yang Guan, Yangang Ren, and Sifa Zheng. Model-based constrained reinforcement learning using gen-eralized control barrier function. In IEEE/RSJ In-ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 4552–4559. IEEE, 2021. [31] Manao Machida and Masumi Ichien. Consensus-based control barrier function for swarm. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-tion (ICRA) , pages 8623–8628. IEEE, 2021. [32] Tamas G Molnar, Suresh K Kannan, James Cun-ningham, Kyle Dunlap, Kerianne L Hobbs, and Aaron D Ames. Collision avoidance and geofenc-ing for fixed-wing aircraft with control barrier func-tions. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Tech-nology , 2025. [33] Tamas G Molnar, Gábor Orosz, and Aaron D Ames. On the safety of connected cruise control: analysis and synthesis with control barrier functions. In 62th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) ,pages 1106–1111. IEEE, 2023. [34] Yejin Moon and Hosam K. Fathy. Graceful safety control: Motivation and application to battery ther-mal runaway. IFAC-PapersOnLine , 58(28):666– 671, 2024. [35] Yejin Moon, Behzad Kadkhodaei Elyaderani, Joshua Leibowitz, Parham Rezaei, Eman M Ab-delazim, Morcos Awad, Stephen Stachnik, Shelby Stewart, Joseph S Friedberg, Jin-Oh Hahn, and Hosam K Fathy. Safe model-based multivari-able control of peritoneal perfusion. IFAC-PapersOnLine , 56(3):301–306, 2023. [36] Yejin Moon, Gábor Orosz, and Hosam K Fathy. Graceful vehicle collision avoidance using a second-order nonlinear barrier constraint. In 2025 Amer-ican Control Conference (ACC) , pages 259–266. IEEE, 2025. [37] Quan Nguyen and Koushil Sreenath. Exponential control barrier functions for enforcing high relative-degree safety-critical constraints. In American Con-trol Conference (ACC) , pages 322–328. IEEE, 2016. [38] Steven Otfinoski. Captain Sully’s river landing: the Hudson hero of flight 1549 . Tangled History, 2019. [39] Dimitra Panagou, Dušan M Stipanovič, and Pet-ros G Voulgaris. Multi-objective control for multi-agent systems using lyapunov-like barrier functions. In 52nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control ,pages 1478–1483. IEEE, 2013. [40] Cesar Santoyo, Maxence Dutreix, and Samuel Coogan. A barrier function approach to finite-time stochastic system verification and control. Auto-matica , 125:109439, 2021. [41] Meenakshi Sarkar, Debasish Ghose, and Evange-los A Theodorou. High-relative degree stochas-tic control Lyapunov and barrier functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03856 , 2020. [42] Charles P Shelton, Philip Koopman, and William Nace. A framework for scalable analysis and design of system-wide graceful degradation in distributed embedded systems. In 8th International Workshop on Object-Oriented Real-Time Dependable Systems (WORDS) , pages 156–163. IEEE, 2003. [43] Andrew Taylor, Andrew Singletary, Yisong Yue, and Aaron Ames. Learning for safety-critical con-trol with control barrier functions. In 2nd Learning for Dynamics and Control COnference , pages 708– 717. PMLR, 2020. [44] Andrew J Taylor and Aaron D Ames. Adaptive safety with control barrier functions. In Ameri-can Control Conference (ACC) , pages 1399–1405. IEEE, 2020. [45] Shashank Dhananjay Vyas, Tanushree Roy, and Satadru Dey. Thermal fault-tolerance in lithium-ion battery cells: A barrier function based input-to-state safety framework. In IEEE Conference on Control Technology and Applications (CCTA) ,pages 1178–1183. IEEE, 2022. [46] Chuanzheng Wang, Yiming Meng, Yinan Li, Stephen L Smith, and Jun Liu. Learning con-trol barrier functions with high relative degree for safety-critical control. In European Control Confer-ence (ECC) , pages 1459–1464. IEEE, 2021. [47] Philipp Weiss, Andreas Weichslgartner, Felix 14 Reimann, and Sebastian Steinhorst. Fail-operational automotive software design using agent-based graceful degradation. In 2020 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhi-bition (DATE) , pages 1169–1174. IEEE, 2020. [48] Peter Wieland and Frank Allgöwer. Constructive safety using control barrier functions. IFAC Pro-ceedings Volumes , 40(12):462–467, 2007. [49] Wei Xiao and Calin Belta. Control barrier functions for systems with high relative degree. In 58th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pages 474–479. IEEE, 2019. [50] Wei Xiao, Calin Belta, and Christos G Cassandras. Adaptive control barrier functions. IEEE Transac-tions on Automatic Control , 67(5):2267–2281, 2021. [51] Wei Xiao, Ramin Hasani, Xiao Li, and Daniela Rus. Barriernet: A safety-guaranteed layer for neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.11277 , 2021. [52] Wei Xiao, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Makram Chahine, Alexander Amini, Ramin Hasani, and Daniela Rus. Differentiable control barrier functions for vision-based end-to-end autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02401 , 2022. [53] Wei Xiao, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Ramin Hasani, Makram Chahine, Alexander Amini, Xiao Li, and Daniela Rus. Barriernet: Differentiable control bar-rier functions for learning of safe robot control. 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 2023. [54] Xiangru Xu. Constrained control of input–output linearizable systems using control sharing barrier functions. Automatica , 87:195–201, 2018. [55] Xiangru Xu, Jessy W Grizzle, Paulo Tabuada, and Aaron D Ames. Correctness guarantees for the com-position of lane keeping and adaptive cruise control. 

IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and En-gineering , 15(3):1216–1229, 2017. [56] Shakiba Yaghoubi, Georgios Fainekos, and Sriram Sankaranarayanan. Training neural network con-trollers using control barrier functions in the pres-ence of disturbances. In 23rd IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) , pages 1–6. IEEE, 2020. [57] Weidi Yin, Hosam K Fathy, and Jin-Oh Hahn. Safe automation of interfering medical treatments via control barrier functions and reachability analysis: a fluid resuscitation-sedation-vasopressor infusion case study. Journal of Clinical Monitoring and Computing , pages 1–18, 2025. [58] Jun Zeng, Bike Zhang, and Koushil Sreenath. Safety-critical model predictive control with discrete-time control barrier function. In Ameri-can Control Conference (ACC) , pages 3882–3889. IEEE, 2021. 15